integration/tsd-oidc.md, before:


# TSD OIDC

TSD OpenID implements the [code flow](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html), along with the [Proof Key for Code Exchange](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7636) extension. The former is available for confidential clients, while the latter is enforced for public clients. All endpoints, documented below, are available at `https://test.api.tsd.usit.no/tsd-oidc-provider`for the test environment and `https://oidc.tsd.usit.no/tsd-oidc-provider` for production.

### /.well-known/openid-configuration

The dynamic configuration endpoint, available [here](https://oidc.tsd.usit.no/tsd-oidc-provider/.well-known/openid-configuration), shows where to obtain the provider's public key `/jwk`, which clients can use for idtoken signature validation. It also shows a host of other provider metadata. To read more about their meaning, refer to [the specification](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-discovery-1_0.html#ProviderMetadata).

### /authorize

The code flow starts with the client redirecting the user agent to the `/authorize` endpoint. An example redirect for the code flow, without PKCE, including all mandatory parameters is (with newline formatting just for clarity):

```txt
/authorize?
    response_type=code&
    scope=openid&
    client_id=944b2d25-7871-4c60-91cf-d44d38e918bd&
    redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fmyapp.com%2Fresources%0A&
    nonce=oaBP3Db6tQiLSV1TrDO0PnJ97Msea8FUoV8RZLLl-x8&
    state=6Gy0dPeuO_GYT9Qbx08GP5nXalxPD63apOGJ9K6P71I
```

If the client was registered as a public client, and therefore using PKCE, including the `code_challenge` and `code_challenge_method` would be mandatory:

```txt
/authorize?
    response_type=code&
    scope=openid&
    client_id=944b2d25-7871-4c60-91cf-d44d38e918bd&
    redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fmyapp.com%2Fresources%0A&
    nonce=oaBP3Db6tQiLSV1TrDO0PnJ97Msea8FUoV8RZLLl-x8&
    state=6Gy0dPeuO_GYT9Qbx08GP5nXalxPD63apOGJ9K6P71I
    code_challenge=2b7c122893a57c75a68b38dc3eb13aedc29c39e5aa582db59720afc89dafce10&
    code_challenge_method=S256
```

where the value of the `code_challenge` is a SHA-256 digest of a random session secret genrated by the client.

Supported parameters are:

* `response_type`, _mandatory_, value `code`
* `scope`, _mandatory_, url encoded space separated list, supported scopes:
    * `openid`, _mandatory_
    * `profile`, _optional_, profile information, included by default
    * `groups`, _optional_, user group memberships, included by default
    * `mods`, _optional_, user group moderations, included by default
    * `users`, _optional_, all TSD users, included by default
    * `projects`, _optional_, all TSD projects
    * `identifiers`, _optional_, personal identifiers
* `client_id` _mandatory_, client identifier
* `redirect_uri` _mandatory_, registered redirect URI
* `nonce` _mandatory_, random session value generated by client
    * note: the provider requires entropy greater or equal to that of a UUID
* `state` _mandatory_, random session value generated by client
    * note: the provider requires entropy greater or equal to that of a UUID
* `code_challenge` _mandatory for PKCE_, SHA-256 digest of random value generated by client
* `code_challenge_method` _mandatory for PKCE_, value `S256`
* `acr_values`, _optional_, url encoded space separated list, ordered in preference
    * supported values `level3`, `level1`
    * `level3`, password and OTP is the default
    * `level1`, password only, is only supported inside TSD
* `prompt`, _optional_, used in combination with `id_token_hint` when `prompt=none` to perform SSO
* `max_age`, _optional_, use in combination with `prompt` specifying the maximum amount of minutes which may have elapsed since the previous authentication, TSD enforces a maximum of two hours, clients can choose smaler values
* `id_token_hint`, _optional_, the ID token itself, compulsory to include when doing SSO with `prompt`

A successful request to `/authorize` will result in the provider prompting the user for authentication. If authentication succeeds, then the provider will redirect back to the provided `redirect_uri`, adding the `state` parameter, and the `code`, to be used in the `/token` request. An example redirect is:

```txt
/resources?
    state=6Gy0dPeuO_GYT9Qbx08GP5nXalxPD63apOGJ9K6P71I&
    code=Xx3jD7Gb9b3THvo0NRJHb132mlm9QmUikHwbrnU9TRk.oaBP3Db6tQiLSV1TrDO0PnJ97Msea8FUoV8RZLLl-x8.YCTnCQ.bEEy9S1Aqtw1TE60vuVgpkUijEI
```

### /token

An example `/token` request, for confidential clients not using PKCE is:

```txt
POST /tsd-oidc-provider/token
Authorization: Basic b64(client_id:client_secret)
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

grant_type=authorization_code&
code=Xx3jD7Gb9b3THvo0NRJHb132mlm9QmUikHwbrnU9TRk.oaBP3Db6tQiLSV1TrDO0PnJ97Msea8FUoV8RZLLl-x8.YCTnCQ.bEEy9S1Aqtw1TE60vuVgpkUijEI&
redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fmyapp.com%2Fresources%0A&
nonce=oaBP3Db6tQiLSV1TrDO0PnJ97Msea8FUoV8RZLLl-x8
```

Public clients omit the `Authorization` header, but include the `code_verifier`:

```txt
POST /tsd-oidc-provider/token
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

grant_type=authorization_code&
code=Xx3jD7Gb9b3THvo0NRJHb132mlm9QmUikHwbrnU9TRk.oaBP3Db6tQiLSV1TrDO0PnJ97Msea8FUoV8RZLLl-x8.YCTnCQ.bEEy9S1Aqtw1TE60vuVgpkUijEI&
redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fmyapp.com%2Fresources%0A&
nonce=oaBP3Db6tQiLSV1TrDO0PnJ97Msea8FUoV8RZLLl-x8&
code_verifier=mysecretvalue
```

The following conditions must hold:

* the request must be made before the code expires
* the `redirect_uri` must be the same as the one used in the `/authorize` request
* the `nonce` must be the same as the one used in the `/authorize` request


### idtoken

If the `/token` request is successful, then an `idtoken` is returned, e.g.:

```json
{
    "access_token": "eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiJ9.eyJhdWQiOiI5NDRiMmQyNS03ODcxLTRjNjAtOTFjZi1kNDRkMzhlOTE4YmQiLCJleHAiOjE2MTMwMzI5NzcsImlkIjoicDExLWxlb25jZCJ9.9V4z7GHI27x3avyGtcrxCTpRthHtZgZKhfDKFc-4u4Y",
    "token_type": "Bearer",
    "refresh_token": null,
    "expires_in": 30,
    "id_token": "eyJhbGciOiJSUzI1NiIsImtpZCI6IkZoSFBTNm90NTNmdnZIM3QtSlV3Vm5hMmVzczNYcUx2dkNuQWl1cWp4dm8ifQ.eyJhY3IiOiJsZXZlbDMiLCJhbXIiOiJUU0QtQXV0aCIsImF1ZCI6Ijk0NGIyZDI1LTc4NzEtNGM2MC05MWNmLWQ0NGQzOGU5MThiZCIsImF1dGhfdGltZSI6MTYxMjk1NDA3OSwiZXhwIjoxNjEzMDMyOTc3LCJpYXQiOjE2MTMwMzExNzcsImlzcyI6Imh0dHA6Ly9sb2NhbGhvc3Q6Mjk5OS92MS9hbGwvdHNkLW9pZGMtcHJvdmlkZXIiLCJub25jZSI6Im9hQlAzRGI2dFFpTFNWMVRyRE8wUG5KOTdNc2VhOEZVb1Y4UlpMTGwteDgiLCJwcm9qIjoicDExIiwic3ViIjoiIiwidXNlciI6InAxMS1sZW9uY2QifQ.ZvsUpnABXswcHcrFWLJFfuUF6Pa7-Rl1gsg2ScjhesU9DU6xvUTQdqFyO97DYWpAtkDBL0Cr9spVcOueObsFJS5vtvvltwk3ZND0-91V0eDbpgOe8rpPgjf_L7ykbSLjXVyLg2NxvBPu0aSlsPW884yyqo37rzg022WNLbqojZUnpZKyP-7_04BFu7zuMd6FONHjEqZFtzOzJFb0gt_U9q_AbQ5WBb3yGmJwNg7NFSkmPBK8OUOomcym90TcFTXvthUzuRr4gooppAC2q48LV_Xr1dRvpqJTpA_jjX4BzVA1qFsharmMDexjyx_8oJdfFCm8X4Lqnocyk00K3jnD3w"
}
```

with attributes as follows:

* `access_token`, a JWT for use at the `/userinfo` endpoint
* `token_type`, which type of token the `access_token` is
* `refresh_token`, `null` in this case
* `expires_in`, minutes in which the `id_token` expires
* `id_token`, a JWT with the following claims, e.g.:

```json
{
  "acr": "level3",
  "amr": "TSD-Auth",
  "aud": "944b2d25-7871-4c60-91cf-d44d38e918bd",
  "auth_time": 1612954079,
  "exp": 1613032977,
  "iat": 1613031177,
  "iss": "https://oidc.tsd.usit.no/tsd-oidc-provider",
  "nonce": "oaBP3Db6tQiLSV1TrDO0PnJ97Msea8FUoV8RZLLl-x8",
  "proj": "p11",
  "sub": "226d4cb4-5e95-40a2-855d-583e5a8930a5",
  "user": "p11-test"
}
```

The claims are:

* `acr`, Authentication Context Class Reference, or level of assurance
* `amr`, Authentication Methods References, identifies the authentication method used
* `aud`, the audience, i.e. client_id
* `auth_time`, time when authentication occurred
* `exp`, time when id_token expires
* `iat`, time when idtoken was issued
* `iss`, issuer, i.e. the OpenID Proviider
* `nonce`, random value generated at start of code flow
* `sub`, opaque persistent string identifying the user

Along with provider specific claims:

* `proj`, which TSD project was authenticated against
* `user`, the user name which was used during authentication

Additional claims are added based on the scopes requested.

### /userinfo

To get additional information about authenticated users, client can make requests to the `/userinfo` endpoint, where specific scopes can be requested. If no scopes are specified the following will be returned by default, in JSON format:

* `sub`
* `user`
* `proj`
* `groups`
* `mods`
* `name`

If clients prefer to receive results from the `/userinfo` endpoint as signed JWT instead of JSON, then they can request this from TSD.

### /end_session

To end a session, thereby preventing any further SSO, client make a `GET` or `POST` request to `/end_session` such as, e.g.:

```txt
/end_session?
  id_token_hint=<the_id_token_which_identifies_the_session>&
  post_logout_redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fmyapp.com%2Flogged_out%0A
  state=6Gy0dPeuO_GYT9Qbx08GP5nXalxPD63apOGJ9K6P71I
```

Clients must register the `post_logout_redirect_uri`s which will be used. Including the `state` is optional.

Commit message:

add example of userinfo request

integration/tsd-oidc.md, after:


# TSD OIDC

TSD OpenID implements the [code flow](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html), along with the [Proof Key for Code Exchange](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7636) extension. The former is available for confidential clients, while the latter is enforced for public clients. All endpoints, documented below, are available at `https://test.api.tsd.usit.no/tsd-oidc-provider`for the test environment and `https://oidc.tsd.usit.no/tsd-oidc-provider` for production.

### /.well-known/openid-configuration

The dynamic configuration endpoint, available [here](https://oidc.tsd.usit.no/tsd-oidc-provider/.well-known/openid-configuration), shows where to obtain the provider's public key `/jwk`, which clients can use for idtoken signature validation. It also shows a host of other provider metadata. To read more about their meaning, refer to [the specification](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-discovery-1_0.html#ProviderMetadata).

### /authorize

The code flow starts with the client redirecting the user agent to the `/authorize` endpoint. An example redirect for the code flow, without PKCE, including all mandatory parameters is (with newline formatting just for clarity):

```txt
/authorize?
    response_type=code&
    scope=openid&
    client_id=944b2d25-7871-4c60-91cf-d44d38e918bd&
    redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fmyapp.com%2Fresources%0A&
    nonce=oaBP3Db6tQiLSV1TrDO0PnJ97Msea8FUoV8RZLLl-x8&
    state=6Gy0dPeuO_GYT9Qbx08GP5nXalxPD63apOGJ9K6P71I
```

If the client was registered as a public client, and therefore using PKCE, including the `code_challenge` and `code_challenge_method` would be mandatory:

```txt
/authorize?
    response_type=code&
    scope=openid&
    client_id=944b2d25-7871-4c60-91cf-d44d38e918bd&
    redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fmyapp.com%2Fresources%0A&
    nonce=oaBP3Db6tQiLSV1TrDO0PnJ97Msea8FUoV8RZLLl-x8&
    state=6Gy0dPeuO_GYT9Qbx08GP5nXalxPD63apOGJ9K6P71I
    code_challenge=2b7c122893a57c75a68b38dc3eb13aedc29c39e5aa582db59720afc89dafce10&
    code_challenge_method=S256
```

where the value of the `code_challenge` is a SHA-256 digest of a random session secret genrated by the client.

Supported parameters are:

* `response_type`, _mandatory_, value `code`
* `scope`, _mandatory_, url encoded space separated list, supported scopes:
    * `openid`, _mandatory_
    * `profile`, _optional_, profile information, included by default
    * `groups`, _optional_, user group memberships, included by default
    * `mods`, _optional_, user group moderations, included by default
    * `users`, _optional_, all TSD users, included by default
    * `projects`, _optional_, all TSD projects
    * `identifiers`, _optional_, personal identifiers
* `client_id` _mandatory_, client identifier
* `redirect_uri` _mandatory_, registered redirect URI
* `nonce` _mandatory_, random session value generated by client
    * note: the provider requires entropy greater or equal to that of a UUID
* `state` _mandatory_, random session value generated by client
    * note: the provider requires entropy greater or equal to that of a UUID
* `code_challenge` _mandatory for PKCE_, SHA-256 digest of random value generated by client
* `code_challenge_method` _mandatory for PKCE_, value `S256`
* `acr_values`, _optional_, url encoded space separated list, ordered in preference
    * supported values `level3`, `level1`
    * `level3`, password and OTP is the default
    * `level1`, password only, is only supported inside TSD
* `prompt`, _optional_, used in combination with `id_token_hint` when `prompt=none` to perform SSO
* `max_age`, _optional_, use in combination with `prompt` specifying the maximum amount of minutes which may have elapsed since the previous authentication, TSD enforces a maximum of two hours, clients can choose smaler values
* `id_token_hint`, _optional_, the ID token itself, compulsory to include when doing SSO with `prompt`

A successful request to `/authorize` will result in the provider prompting the user for authentication. If authentication succeeds, then the provider will redirect back to the provided `redirect_uri`, adding the `state` parameter, and the `code`, to be used in the `/token` request. An example redirect is:

```txt
/resources?
    state=6Gy0dPeuO_GYT9Qbx08GP5nXalxPD63apOGJ9K6P71I&
    code=Xx3jD7Gb9b3THvo0NRJHb132mlm9QmUikHwbrnU9TRk.oaBP3Db6tQiLSV1TrDO0PnJ97Msea8FUoV8RZLLl-x8.YCTnCQ.bEEy9S1Aqtw1TE60vuVgpkUijEI
```

### /token

An example `/token` request, for confidential clients not using PKCE is:

```txt
POST /tsd-oidc-provider/token
Authorization: Basic b64(client_id:client_secret)
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

grant_type=authorization_code&
code=Xx3jD7Gb9b3THvo0NRJHb132mlm9QmUikHwbrnU9TRk.oaBP3Db6tQiLSV1TrDO0PnJ97Msea8FUoV8RZLLl-x8.YCTnCQ.bEEy9S1Aqtw1TE60vuVgpkUijEI&
redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fmyapp.com%2Fresources%0A&
nonce=oaBP3Db6tQiLSV1TrDO0PnJ97Msea8FUoV8RZLLl-x8
```

Public clients omit the `Authorization` header, but include the `code_verifier`:

```txt
POST /tsd-oidc-provider/token
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

grant_type=authorization_code&
code=Xx3jD7Gb9b3THvo0NRJHb132mlm9QmUikHwbrnU9TRk.oaBP3Db6tQiLSV1TrDO0PnJ97Msea8FUoV8RZLLl-x8.YCTnCQ.bEEy9S1Aqtw1TE60vuVgpkUijEI&
redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fmyapp.com%2Fresources%0A&
nonce=oaBP3Db6tQiLSV1TrDO0PnJ97Msea8FUoV8RZLLl-x8&
code_verifier=mysecretvalue
```

The following conditions must hold:

* the request must be made before the code expires
* the `redirect_uri` must be the same as the one used in the `/authorize` request
* the `nonce` must be the same as the one used in the `/authorize` request


### idtoken

If the `/token` request is successful, then an `idtoken` is returned, e.g.:

```json
{
    "access_token": "eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiJ9.eyJhdWQiOiI5NDRiMmQyNS03ODcxLTRjNjAtOTFjZi1kNDRkMzhlOTE4YmQiLCJleHAiOjE2MTMwMzI5NzcsImlkIjoicDExLWxlb25jZCJ9.9V4z7GHI27x3avyGtcrxCTpRthHtZgZKhfDKFc-4u4Y",
    "token_type": "Bearer",
    "refresh_token": null,
    "expires_in": 30,
    "id_token": "eyJhbGciOiJSUzI1NiIsImtpZCI6IkZoSFBTNm90NTNmdnZIM3QtSlV3Vm5hMmVzczNYcUx2dkNuQWl1cWp4dm8ifQ.eyJhY3IiOiJsZXZlbDMiLCJhbXIiOiJUU0QtQXV0aCIsImF1ZCI6Ijk0NGIyZDI1LTc4NzEtNGM2MC05MWNmLWQ0NGQzOGU5MThiZCIsImF1dGhfdGltZSI6MTYxMjk1NDA3OSwiZXhwIjoxNjEzMDMyOTc3LCJpYXQiOjE2MTMwMzExNzcsImlzcyI6Imh0dHA6Ly9sb2NhbGhvc3Q6Mjk5OS92MS9hbGwvdHNkLW9pZGMtcHJvdmlkZXIiLCJub25jZSI6Im9hQlAzRGI2dFFpTFNWMVRyRE8wUG5KOTdNc2VhOEZVb1Y4UlpMTGwteDgiLCJwcm9qIjoicDExIiwic3ViIjoiIiwidXNlciI6InAxMS1sZW9uY2QifQ.ZvsUpnABXswcHcrFWLJFfuUF6Pa7-Rl1gsg2ScjhesU9DU6xvUTQdqFyO97DYWpAtkDBL0Cr9spVcOueObsFJS5vtvvltwk3ZND0-91V0eDbpgOe8rpPgjf_L7ykbSLjXVyLg2NxvBPu0aSlsPW884yyqo37rzg022WNLbqojZUnpZKyP-7_04BFu7zuMd6FONHjEqZFtzOzJFb0gt_U9q_AbQ5WBb3yGmJwNg7NFSkmPBK8OUOomcym90TcFTXvthUzuRr4gooppAC2q48LV_Xr1dRvpqJTpA_jjX4BzVA1qFsharmMDexjyx_8oJdfFCm8X4Lqnocyk00K3jnD3w"
}
```

with attributes as follows:

* `access_token`, a JWT for use at the `/userinfo` endpoint
* `token_type`, which type of token the `access_token` is
* `refresh_token`, `null` in this case
* `expires_in`, minutes in which the `id_token` expires
* `id_token`, a JWT with the following claims, e.g.:

```json
{
  "acr": "level3",
  "amr": "TSD-Auth",
  "aud": "944b2d25-7871-4c60-91cf-d44d38e918bd",
  "auth_time": 1612954079,
  "exp": 1613032977,
  "iat": 1613031177,
  "iss": "https://oidc.tsd.usit.no/tsd-oidc-provider",
  "nonce": "oaBP3Db6tQiLSV1TrDO0PnJ97Msea8FUoV8RZLLl-x8",
  "proj": "p11",
  "sub": "226d4cb4-5e95-40a2-855d-583e5a8930a5",
  "user": "p11-test"
}
```

The claims are:

* `acr`, Authentication Context Class Reference, or level of assurance
* `amr`, Authentication Methods References, identifies the authentication method used
* `aud`, the audience, i.e. client_id
* `auth_time`, time when authentication occurred
* `exp`, time when id_token expires
* `iat`, time when idtoken was issued
* `iss`, issuer, i.e. the OpenID Proviider
* `nonce`, random value generated at start of code flow
* `sub`, opaque persistent string identifying the user

Along with provider specific claims:

* `proj`, which TSD project was authenticated against
* `user`, the user name which was used during authentication

Additional claims are added based on the scopes requested.

### /userinfo

To get additional information about authenticated users, client can make requests to the `/userinfo` endpoint, where specific scopes can be requested. If no scopes are specified the following will be returned by default, in JSON format:

* `sub`
* `user`
* `proj`
* `groups`
* `mods`
* `name`

If clients prefer to receive results from the `/userinfo` endpoint as signed JWT instead of JSON, then they can request this from TSD. An example request is:

```txt
GET /tsd-oidc-provider/userinfo
Authorization: Bearer $access_token
```

Clients should use the access token that is returned as a part ID token.

### /end_session

To end a session, thereby preventing any further SSO, client make a `GET` or `POST` request to `/end_session` such as, e.g.:

```txt
/end_session?
  id_token_hint=<the_id_token_which_identifies_the_session>&
  post_logout_redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fmyapp.com%2Flogged_out%0A
  state=6Gy0dPeuO_GYT9Qbx08GP5nXalxPD63apOGJ9K6P71I
```

Clients must register the `post_logout_redirect_uri`s which will be used. Including the `state` is optional.
